Hello everyone in this lesson we will answer the question how do I get my own board press.
Right.
So how do I get my own public facing web site and how do I get my own administrator dashboard.
Well there are two main ways to get started with Wordpress and it all boils down to two Web sites WordPress
dot com and wordpress dot org.
Now they each have their own pros and cons.
So let me go over those right now.
Let's start with wordpress dot com.
The pros of Wordpress dot com is that it's very easy to get started.
You simply visit WordPress dot com and you sign up for an account.
So it's really similar to signing up for a new email account with Google or Gmail or it's like signing
up for a new account at Facebook.
It's super intuitive super simple.
Now they do offer different types of accounts or plans.
So some of the plans cost a monthly fee but they also have a free plan to get you started.
And there's no time limit for the free plan.
It will remain free forever.
All right changing gears let's talk about the cons of Wordpress dotcom.
So number one you are not in complete control of your web site.
Your web site lives on the Wordpress dot com servers and this means you are really at their mercy.
This means they limit which plugins you can use they limit which themes you can use.
Now I realize at this point in the course we haven't even covered what a plug in or theme is but you
can imagine that you don't want to be limited.
That's never a good thing.
So the general idea is that you can only customize the parts of your website that WordPress dot com
allows you to customize.
Now depending on your business or depending on what you want to achieve with your Web site this might
not bother you if you just want to create a simple blog and be able to write and share your writing
with the entire world.
WordPress dot com can be an amazing service.
However WordPress dot com is clearly not for everyone because it is very restrictive or limiting.
So now let's really change gears and talk about WordPress dot org.
Let's go over the pros and cons.
We'll start with the pros.
Number one this is the full WordPress experience.
This is what people think of when they think of Wordpress with Wordpress or you are in 100 percent complete
control of your website.
You are the owner of your website.
You can customize anything you want.
You can use any plugin you can use any theme again at this stage in the course we don't really know
what those words mean plug in and theme but you can imagine that the freedom to use whatever you want
is a good thing.
With wordpress org you're also free to monetize your Web site.
That means you can run ads or sell products so on and so forth.
And the final pro and this is not necessary.
You don't ever need to learn how to code.
If you don't want to but if in the future you decide you want to learn how to code with wordpress.
Or you're free to customize the code of every single aspect of your website.
So in a nutshell Wordpress or is amazing.
It's personally what I use for my web sites now.
I haven't even gotten to the cons of Wordpress dot org yet and I can already tell you that this is what
we're going to use in the course.
Now you are free to use Wordpress dot com with the advice to outside of this course but for the purposes
of learning as much as possible in this course.
I encourage you to follow along with me and give WordPress dot org a try.
Now let's talk about the cons.
There's really only one con to WordPress dot org and that is that you need to find your own web hosting.
What does that mean.
What is web hosting.
Well remember when I said that with wordpress dot com your web site lives on their servers and this
is what allows them to limit or restrict what you can do with wordpress dot org.
Your web site will live on whatever web host company you choose and there are hundreds of thousands
of web host companies to choose from a web host is just a company that leaves their computers or servers
on 24 hours a day 365 days a year and your web site lives on their servers so that way your web site
is accessible to the world around the clock.
Now any web host worth using costs money.
But don't worry I want you to be able to work through this course without spending an extra penny.
So I've partnered with a web host so you can get started for free.
You won't even need to enter a credit card or any form of payment.
We'll talk more about that in just a few minutes.
But anyways with web hosts you typically pay a monthly or yearly amount and in return they host your
Web site for you.
Generally speaking you get what you pay for meaning the more expensive the web host the faster your
site will load for your visitors.
Now like I said there are tons of web hosting companies to choose from and it can be difficult to know
where to begin.
Which companies should we use.
Well if we open up our web browser and go to the official WordPress dot org Web site we see that up
in the header.
Within this main navigation bar towards the right hand side there's a link named hosting over the years
the Wordpress team has paid attention to which hosting companies treat their customers the best and
make working with wordpress a breeze.
Now you don't have to use one of these companies but these are among the best.
So we see blue host dream host flywheel and site ground.
Now normally it costs money to sign up with one of these web hosts but I've partnered with site ground
for this course and thanks to that partnership you can get started with your own hosting and wordpress
site without spending another penny.
Now I don't want you to feel like you have to use site ground if you want to google and do your own
research and choose a hosting company on your own.
More kudos to you but as the teacher of this course I want to provide a clear example path that anyone
can follow.
All right.
So let's get started.
As a student in this course you are free to visit the following URL learn web code dot com slash student
dash Costain so learn web code dot com is my web site and then the slash student hosting will take us
to the free site.
Ground Seiner.
So if I push enter to visit this you are l we see special deal for learn web code students create your
Web site now.
So I'm going to click the sign out button.
Just enter your e-mail address and make up a password then just fill in a bit of basic contact info.
So basically your name and your address.
Scroll down a bit further within this box.
Three months is the only available option.
And again it's not like at the end of three months they can automatically believe you.
They can't because we aren't even entering a credit card.
So we see zero dollars and zero cents and if we scroll down a bit further make sure this box is checked
and the submit button reads pain now.
But obviously our grand total is zero dollars and zero cents.
So you're not actually paying.
So go ahead and click the pay now button.
And that should take you to this success screen.
Now it may take five seconds or may take ten minutes but very soon you should receive an e-mail from
site ground.
In that e-mail look for a button or link that reads log in to customer area or you can simply hover
over this button in the top right that reads log in and you can enter your email and password right
here.
Or if you actually click right about here that will take you to the dedicated logging page.
It doesn't matter how you log in.
OK.
So go ahead and type in your e-mail and your password.
And then click sign that should take you to this page for this first option of set up your website.
Let's choose the option of start a new Web site and then from these available options.
Obviously we're interested in the first one WordPress.
So click that let me scroll down a bit within this section we are going to create the administrator
user for WordPress.
Right.
So this will be the account that has access to the Wordpress administrator dashboard screens.
So enter your email address and a username.
Here's a quick security tip.
Instead of using a user name of the admin choose something that's a bit more difficult for other people
to guess.
So maybe my secret admin or something along those lines and then make up another password here.
And before you click this confirm button double check that you spelled your email address correctly.
OK so when you're all set click the confirm button.
Which will take us to the next screen and from here we just want to check this checkbox that says we
agree to the terms of service and then we can click on complete set up.
Now it might take five seconds or five minutes but once the screen appears then go ahead and click on
proceed to customer area.
All right now this is our site Ground dash board.
But we're interested in our WordPress admin dashboard.
So up towards the top here click on my accounts and then right here I see the Web site that I just set
up about a minute ago you will have a different you are all right here.
Probably your first name and then the first letter of your last name.
So go ahead and click on that and this is your very own WordPress website.
All right so you could share this you RL with anyone in the world and they would be able to see this
Web site.
All right.
But if this is your Web site you want to be able to log in as the administrator so you can edit and
change and customize your website up in the address bar at the end of your you Arel out on a forward
slash and then W.P. dash logging in dot ph p.
And again this part of your you are will be different.
So press enter and then just add the Wordpress admin username and password.
Remember this is the user name where I told you to maybe use something like my secret admin or something
along those lines.
So go ahead and type in your username and password right now.
Click log in and if you're using the free site Ground account you'll see a screen that looks like this.
You will not see the screen if you are using any other web hosting company.
This is a Quickstart Guide that the site Ground company created to try and make the process of creating
a WordPress Web site a bit easier.
However this Quickstart Guide is not necessary.
You're free to use it if you want to but I recommend just scrolling down to the bottom and clicking
on the exit link.
If you do want to use this Quickstart Guide and you click Start now.
Nothing bad will happen and the default choices are great.
They won't hurt anything.
I just think the steps are necessary so I recommend clicking exit OK.
Now again if you're using site ground like I am you'll see a screen that looks like this.
If you're using any other web host your Wordpress admin dashboard will not look exactly like this.
That's OK.
In fact if you are using site ground like I am I actually encourage you to do the following.
We can go ahead and click this.
Don't show this again message here because we don't really need the site Ground Quickstart Guide.
It's not a part of the official WordPress software.
This is basically just a message from our web hosting company site ground trying to make our lives easier.
So I'd recommend clicking don't show this again and then finally if you're using site ground on our
dashboard here I recommend scrolling down to the very bottom and down here we see the sentence that
reads If you wish.
You can always switch to the default dashboard.
So basically what's going on here is that the site Ground web hosting company is trying to give us a
dashboard that makes our lives easier.
The issue is that this is not the official WordPress dashboard.
So for the sake of having everyone in this course be on the same page I recommend to scroll down to
the bottom here and if you're using site ground you can just click switch to default.
You'll notice as soon as I do this my admin dashboard looks a bit different and that's OK.
This is the official WordPress dashboard and this is what I want you to get used to.
Here I can see that the site Ground optimizer is trying to show me a message.
This is not important.
I can go ahead and click this X towards the right hand side to hide that message.
Also I see this note here about personal data and privacy towards the bottom right hand corner of this
little message I can just click dismiss and congratulations this is your admin dashboard area and from
here you can customize your website which is what we'll be learning how to do in depth throughout this
entire course.
Now I do want to point out that web hosting companies are not charities.
The hard drive space and bandwidth we use even on our experimental Web sites like this cost hosting
companies money.
So let me talk a little about how this free site Ground student account works.
First you'll notice that you did not get your own custom dot com domain.
So for now the URL of your web site is simply your name and then as GED you does site.
Secondly as we saw on the sign up screen this student account will only last for three months.
Now we won't get Bill that the end of three months.
Remember we didn't even enter a credit card but I do want you to be aware of that time limit.
Now three months is more than enough time to learn how to use Wordpress and create a great Web site.
And that's the entire point of this course to learn the ins and outs of WordPress.
If by the end of this course you're really happy with the Web site you create and you want it to be
tied to a real custom your name dot com domain and you want it to live forever instead of 3 months.
That's going to cost a bit of money and in the name of transparency I do want to say that if you decide
to sign up with site ground it won't cost you anything extra.
But they will send me a referral reward for letting you know about them again.
Don't feel like you need to use site ground.
There are hundreds of thousands of web hosts out there for you to research and the choice is yours.
But really choosing which web host you want to give your money to is outside the scope of this course.
I'm just here to get you into your own WordPress sandbox or playground so you can start experimenting
and master the art of creating web sites and blogs with wordpress.
And if you have followed along with this lesson you now have your own WordPress playground.
I'm so excited to start building a site with you and in our next lesson we are off to the races so let's
keep rolling along and I'll see you in the next lesson.